thank you
thank you very much Chancellor Kohl
governing mayor deacon ladies and
gentlemen 24 years ago President John F
Kennedy visited Berlin speaking to the
people of this city and the world at the
city hall or since then two other
presidents have come each in his turn to
Berlin and today I myself make my second
visit to your city we come to Berlin we
American presidents because it's our
duty to speak in this place of freedom
but I must confess
we're drawn here by other things as well
by the feeling of history in this city
more than 500 years older than our own
nation by the beauty of the Grunewald
and the tear garden most of all by your
courage and determination
perhaps the composer Paul linky
understood something about American
presidents you see like so many
presidents before me I come here today
because wherever I go whatever I do ich
hab noch einen coffer in Berlin our
gathering today is cached throughout
Western Europe and North America I
understand that it is being seen and
heard as well in the east to those
listening throughout Eastern Europe I
extend my warmest greetings and the
goodwill of the American people to those
listening in East Berlin a special word
although I cannot be with you I address
my remarks to you just as surely as to
those standing here before me for I join
you as I join your fellow countrymen in
the West in this firm this unalterable
belief has kept it not on Berlin
behind me stands a wall that encircles
the free sectors of this city part of a
vast system of barriers that divides the
entire continent from the baltic south
those barriers cut across Germany in a
gash of barbed wire concrete dog runs
and guard towers
farther south there may be no visible no
obvious wall but the remain armed guards
and checkpoints all the same still a
restriction on the right to travel still
an instrument to impose upon ordinary
men and women the will of a totalitarian
state yet it is here in Berlin where the
wall emerges most clearly here cutting
across your city where the news photo in
the television screen have imprinted
this brutal division of a continent upon
the mind of the world standing before
the Brandenburg Gate every man is a
German separated from his fellow men
every man is a Berliner forced to look
upon a scar president von weizsäcker has
said the German question is open as long
as the brandenburg gate is closed today
the day I say as long as this gate is
closed as long as this scar of a wall is
permitted to stand it is not the German
question alone that remains open but the
question of freedom for all mankind yet
I do not come here to lament for I find
in Berlin a message of hope even in the
shadow of this wall stage of triumph in
this season of spring in 1945 the people
of Berlin emerged from their air-raid
shelters to find devastation thousands
of miles away the people of the United
States reached out to help and in 1947
Secretary of State as you've been told
George Marshall announced the creation
of what would become known as the
Marshall Plan speaking precisely 40
years ago this month he said our policy
is directed not against any country or
doctrine but against hunger poverty
desperation and chaos
in the reichstag a few moments ago I saw
a display commemorating this 40th
anniversary of the Marshall Plan I was
struck by a sonnet a sign on a burnt-out
gutted structure that was being read I
understand that Berliners of my own
generation can remember seeing signs
like it dotted throughout the Western
sectors of the city the sign read simply
the Marshall Plan is helping here to
strengthen the free world a strong free
world in the West that dream became real
Japan rose from ruin to become an
economic giant Italy France Belgium
virtually every nation in Western Europe
saw political and economic rebirth the
European Community was founded in West
Germany and here in Berlin there took
place an economic miracle the virtue of
spending at an hour
Earhart writer and other leaders
understood the practical importance of
Liberty that just as truth can flourish
only when the journalist is of speech so
prosperity can come about only when the
farmer and businessmen enjoy economic
freedom the German leaders the German
leaders reduced tariffs expanded free
trade lowered taxes from 1950 to 1960
alone the standard of living in West
Germany and Berlin doubled we're four
decades ago there was rubble today in
West Berlin there is the greatest
industrial output of any city in Germany
busy office blocks fine homes and
apartments proud avenues in the
spreading lawns of parkland
we're a city's culture seemed to have
been destroyed
today there are two great universities
orchestras and an opera countless
theaters and museums where there was one
today there's abundance food clothing
automobiles the wonderful of the khuddam
from devastation from utter ruin you
Berliners have in freedom rebuild a city
that once again ranks as one of the
greatest on earth and the Soviets may
have had other plans but my friends
there were a few things the Soviets
didn't count on the leaner helots barely
know who morgue yah one Berliner
schnauzer
in the 1950s in the 1950s
Khrushchev predicted we will bury you
but in the West today we see a free
world that has achieved a level of
prosperity and being unprecedented in
all human history in the Communist world
we see failure technological
backwardness declining standards of
health even one and now now the Soviets
themselves may in a limited way be
coming to understand the importance of
freedom we hear much from Moscow about a
new policy of reform and openness some
political prisoners have been released
certain foreign news broadcasts are no
longer being jammed some economic
enterprises have been permitted to
operate with greater freedom from state
control
are these the beginnings of profound
changes in the Soviet state or are they
token gestures intended to raise false
hopes in the West or to strengthen the
Soviet system without it we welcome
change and openness for we believe that
freedom and security go together that
the advance of human Liberty the advance
of human Liberty can only strengthen the
cause of world peace there is one sign
the Soviets can make that would be
unmistakable that would advance
dramatically dramatically the cause of
freedom and peace general secretary
Gorbachev if you seek peace if you seek
prosperity for the Soviet Union and
Eastern Europe if you seek
liberalization come here to this gate
mr. Gorbachev open this gate
mr. Gorbachev mr. Gorbachev tear down
this wall
I understand the fear of war and the
pain of division that afflict this
continent and I pledge to you my
country's efforts to help overcome these
burdens to be sure we in the West must
priests Soviet expansion so we must
maintain defenses of unassailable
strength yet we seek peace so we must
strive to reduce arms on both sides
beginning ten years ago the Soviets
challenged the Western alliance with a
grave new threat
hundreds of newly ss-20 nuclear missiles
capable of striking every capital in
Europe the Western alliance responded by
committing itself to a counter
deployment unless the Soviets agreed to
negotiate a better solution namely the
elimination of such weapons on both
sides for many months
the Soviets refused to bargain in
earnestness as the Alliance in turn
retook prepared to go forward with its
counter deployment there were difficult
days days of protests like those during
my 1982 visit to this city and the
Soviets later walked away from the table
but through it all the Alliance held
firm and I invite those who protested
then I invite those who protest today
to mark this fact because we remain
strong
the Soviets came back to the table
because we remain strong today we have
within reach the possibility not merely
of limiting the growth of arms but of
eliminating for the first time an entire
class of nuclear weapons from the face
of the earth as I speak NATO ministers
are meeting in Iceland to review the
progress of our proposals for
eliminating these weapons at the talks
in Geneva we have also proposed deep
cuts in strategic offensive weapons and
the Western Allies have likewise made
far-reaching proposals to reduce the
danger of conventional war and to place
a total ban on chemical weapons while we
pursue these arms reductions I pledge to
you that we will main the capacity to
deter Soviet aggression at any level at
which it might occur
and in cooperation with many of our
allies the United States is pursuing the
Strategic Defense Initiative research to
base deterrence not on the threat of
offensive retaliation but on defenses
that truly defend on systems in short
that will not target populations but
shield them by these means we seek to
increase the safety of Europe and all
the world but we must remember a crucial
fact East and West do not mistrust each
other because we are armed we are armed
because we mistrust each other and our
differences are not about weapons but
about liberty when President Kennedy
spoke at the city hall those 24 years
ago freedom was encircled Berlin was
under siege and today despite all the
pressures upon this city Berlin stands
secure in its liberty and freedom itself
is transforming the globe in the
Philippines in South and Central America
democracy has been given a rebirth
throughout the Pacific free markets are
working miracle after miracle of
economic growth in the industrialized
nations a technological revolution is
taking place a revolution marked by
rapid dramatic advances in computers and
telecommunications in Europe only one
nation and those it controls refuse to
join the community of freedom yet in
this age of redoubled economic growth of
information and the Soviet Union faces a
choice it must make fundamental changes
or it will become obsolete
today thus represents a moment of hope
we in the West stand ready to cooperate
with the east to promote true openness
to break down barriers that separate
people to create a safer freer world and
surely there is no better place than
Berlin the meeting place of East and
West to make a start
three people of Berlin today is in the
past the United States stands for the
strict observance and full
implementation of all parts of the for
power agreement of 1971 let us use the
haitian the seven hundred and fiftieth
anniversary of this city to usher in a
new era to seek a still fuller richer
life for the Berlin of the future
together let us maintain and develop the
ties between the Federal Republic and
the Western sectors of Berlin which is
permitted by the 1971 agreement and I
invite mr. Gorbachev let us work to
bring the eastern and western parts of
the city closer together so that all the
inhabitants of all Berlin can enjoy the
benefits that come with life in one of
the great cities of the world
to open berlin still further to all
Europe East and West let us expand the
vital air access to this city finding
ways of making commercial service to
Berlin more convenient more comfortable
and more economical we look to the day
when West Berlin can become one of the
chief aviation hubs in all Central
Europe with with our French with our
French and British partners the United
States is prepared to help bring
international meetings to Berlin it
would be only fitting for Berlin de
servers the site of United Nations
meetings or world conferences on human
rights and arms control or other issues
that call for international cooperation
there is no better way to establish hope
for the future than to enlighten young
minds and we would be honored to sponsor
summer youth exchanges cultural events
and other programs for young Berliners
from the East our friendship friends I'm
certain will do the same and is my hope
that an authority can be found in East
Berlin to sponsor visits from young
people of the Western sectors
one final proposal one close to my heart
Sport represents a source of enjoyment
and ennoble moment and you may have
noted that the Republic of Korea South
Korea has offered to permit certain
events of the 1988 Olympics to take
place in the north international sports
competitions of all kinds could take
place in both parts of this city and
what better way to demonstrate to the
world the openness of this city than to
offer in some future year to hold the
Olympic Games here in Berlin east and
west
in these four decades as I have said you
Berliners have built a great city you've
done so in spite of threats the Soviet
attempts to impose the East mark the
blockade today the city thrives in spite
of the challenges implicit in the very
presence of this wall what keeps you
here certainly there's a great deal to
be said for your fortitude for your
defiant courage but I believe there's
something deeper something that involves
Berlin's whole look and feel and way of
life not mere sentiment no one could
live long and Berlin without being
completely disabused of illusions
something instead that has seen the
difficulties of life in Berlin but chose
to accept them that continues to build
this good and proud City in contrast to
a surrounding torreón presence that
refuses to release human energies or
aspirations something that speaks with a
powerful voice of affirmation that says
yes to this city yes to the future yes
to freedom in a word I would submit that
what keeps you in Berlin is love
love both profound and abiding perhaps
this gets to the root of the matter to
the most fundamental distinction of all
between east and west the totalitarian
world produces backwardness because it
does such violence to the spirit
hoarding the human impulse to create to
enjoy to worship the totalitarian world
finds even symbols of love and of
worship and affront years ago before
Germans began rebuilding their churches
they erected a secular structure the
television tolerant Alexanderplatz
virtually ever since the authorities
have been working to correct what they
view as the towers one major flaw
treating the glass sphere at the top
with paints and chemicals of every kind
yet even today when the Sun strikes that
sphere lets fear the towers over all
Berlin the light makes the sign of the
Cross
there in Berlin like the city itself
symbols of love symbols of worship
cannot be suppressed as I looked out a
moment ago from the Reichstag that
embodiment of German unity and birds
crudely spray-painted upon the wall
perhaps by a young Berliner quote this
wall will fall beliefs become reality
yes
across Europe this wall will fall for it
cannot withstand faith it cannot
withstand the truth the wall cannot
withstand freedom and I would like
before I close to say one word I have
read and I have been questioned since
I've been here about certain
demonstrations against my coming and I
would like to say just one thing and to
those who demonstrate so I wonder if
they have ever asked themselves that if
they should have the kind of government
they apparently seek no one would be
able to do what they're doing again
thank you
and God bless you all